Hoysaleswara temple, also popularly known as the Halebidu temple is a Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Shiva. It is an ancient temple dating back to the 12th century. It is the Halebidu town's largest monument. Built on the banks of a man-made lake, the temple is a beauty of the Hoysala Empire.

The temple is a renowned Shaivism tradition monument, yet it incorporates themes from Hinduism's Shaktism and Vaishnavism tradition. It also includes pictures from Jainism. The temple used soapstone for its creation and is considered one of the notable historical monuments in Karnataka owing to its intricate reliefs, iconography, inscriptions, sculptures, detailed friezes and history.

Location - Halebidu, a town in Hassan District in the state of Karnataka.

Timings - 6:30 am to 9:00 pm

The Hoysaleswara temple is a Shaivism tradition monument, yet reverentially includes many themes from Vaishnavism and Shaktism tradition of Hinduism, as well as images from Jainism. The Hoysaleswara temple is a twin-temple dedicated to Hoysaleswara and Santaleswara Shiva lingas, named after the masculine and feminine aspects, both equal and joined at their transept. It has two Nandi shrines outside, where each seated Nandi face the respective Shiva linga inside. The temple includes a smaller sanctum for the Hindu Sun god Surya. It once had superstructure towers, but no longer and the temple looks flat. The temple faces east, though the monument is presently visited from the north side. Both the main temples and the Nandi shrines are based on a square plan. The temple was carved from soapstone. It is notable for its sculptures, intricate reliefs, detailed friezes as well its history, iconography, inscriptions in North Indian and South Indian scripts. The temple artwork provides a pictorial window into the life and culture in the 12th century South India. About 340 large reliefs depict the Hindu theology and associated legends. Numerous smaller friezes narrate Hindu texts such as the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the Bhagavata Purana. Some friezes below large reliefs portray its narrative episodes.

The Hoysala period of South Indian history began about 1000 CE and continued through 1346 CE. In this period, they built around 1,500 temples in 958 centres. Halebidu was originally called Dorasamudra in its inscriptions, possibly derived from Dvarasamudra (Sanskrit words "Dvara" (gateway, door) and Samudra (ocean, sea, large water body)). The capital used to be Belur, Karnataka, but Dorasamudra became the established capital under king Vishnuvardhana and served as the capital of the Hoyasala Empire for nearly 300 years